README.md, before:

Heradoc is a markdown to LaTeX converter.
It is a very biased partial reimplementation of [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html) with a pinch of
[hackmd](https://hackmd.io/features?both).

# Building

Rust needs to be installed.
To find out how to install rust, visit <https://rustup.rs> and follow
*all* of the instructions.

## Linux / WSL

**The below doesn't work for WSL, but it's a beginning. If anyone wants to try out building heradoc for WSL, feel free to open a PR.**

For ubuntu, ensure that you are using its latest version, to ensure that you have the newest versions of all packages.
To do that, run `sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade && do-release-upgrade`.

Install `pkg-config`, `libssl-dev`, `libpango1.0-dev`, `libxml2-dev`, `libcairo2-dev`, `texlive` and `graphviz`.
The above names are for ubuntu systems.
For other distributions, those packages may have different names.

## Windows

Install the following programs:
* texlive: Download the `install-tl-windows.exe` from <https://www.tug.org/texlive/acquire-netinstall.html>
    * if downloading with that installer is incredibly slow / takes incredibly long, abort installation and try using a different mirror
    * other latex implementations might also work
* graphviz:
    * **during installation, select *Add Graphviz to the system PATH for all users***
    * download and execute the installer from <https://www2.graphviz.org/Packages/stable/windows/10/cmake/Release/x64/>
    * make sure Graphviz is installed by running `dot.exe` from a *fresh* cmd
    * if the error message `There is no layout engine support for "dot"` appears:
        * open cmd as administrator (search for `cmd` in the start menu, right-click and select "Run as Administrator")
        * run `dot -c`
* in cmd, navigate to the folder into which you cloned this `heradoc` repository and run `cargo install --path .` (note the dot) build and install heradoc for the current user
* to convert a file from markdown to pdf, run `heradoc file.md` in cmd

# Features

- [x] includes of other md files (`[include foo.md]`, `![][foo.md]`)
- [x] cite author formatting (`> -- [@foo]`)
- [x] renders ok-ish in commonmark renderers
- [x] produces readable latex
    + worst case: fall back to latex if heradoc fails
- [x] generate links for sections (non-alphanumerics replaced with `-`, all lowercase)
- [x] Footnotes (currently the footnote is on the page where the footnote definition is placed, not its first reference)
- [x] biber support: `[@foo]` references biber
- [x] inline latex
    + still render markdown between `\begin` and `\end` etc, which pandoc doesn't
    + not if HTML as backend
- [x] Table of Contents: `[TOC]`, `![][//TOC]`
- [x] Bibliography: `[bibliography]`, `![][//bibliography]`
- [x] List of Listings: `[listoflistings]`, `![][//listoflistings]`
- [x] List of Tables: `[listoftables]`, `![][//listoftables]`
- [x] List of Figures: `[listoffigures]`, `![][//listoffigures]`
- [x] ```` ```graphviz````: Rendered graphviz dot format (using dot cli)
- [x] inline latex math mode (`` `$ foo``)
- [x] equation without number (```` ```$$\nfoo\n``` ````)
- [x] equation with number (```` ```$$$\nfoo\n``` ````)
- [x] hrule
- [x] pagebreak / newpage (`\n===\n`)
- [x] unicode support (for common symbols, translate into latex math equivalents, e.g. →, basically neo layer 6 :D )
    - [ ] typographic replacements (e.g. `(c)`, `(r)`, `(tm)`)
    - [ ] code-blocks with inline unicode / math-mode (`\begin{lstlisting}[mathescape=true]`)
- [x] `[appendix]`: sets all correct formatting for appendix, should be used before the heading
- [x] unified labels ([#16](https://github.com/oberien/heradoc/issues/16))
    - Header labels:
        - `{#my-label}\n\n# Header`: "prefix"-style
        - `# Header {#my-label}`: "inline"-style
        - `# Header`: autogenerated (`#header`)
            - `[^a-zA-Z0-9-_ ]` removed, `[ ]` replaced with `-`
    - Code (graphviz, equation, …) / Table / Image labels ("prefix-style"):
        - must start with `{` and end with `}`
        - must be either its own markdown paragraph (empty line before and in some cases empty line after)
            or at the start of a paragraph followed by a SoftBreak (empty line before and line break after)
        - may be indented (will be trimmed)
        ````md
        {#my-label}
        ```rust
        fn main() {}
        ```
        ````
        - Tables require empty line, otherwise it isn't a valid table
        ```md
        {#my-label}
        
        Head 1 | Head 2
        --- | :-:
        Cell 1 | Cell 2
        ```
    - Code (graphviz, equation, …) has additional style for easier compatibility with other markdown parsers
        ````
        ```rust,#my-label
        fn main() {}
        ```
        ````
    - Images (label must start a paragraph and be followed by a line break with the image directly after)
        ```md
        {#fancy-image}
        ![alt-text](link "title")
        ```
- [x] unified item attributes for code blocks / equations / numbered equations / tables
    - [x] label
    - [x] figure / nofigure / figure=true / figure=false
    - [x] caption
    - [x] scale / width / height for image / graphviz / ...
- [x] tasklist: `- [ ] foo`
- [ ] tables: merge columns
- [ ] tables: merge rows
- [ ] tables: merge columns and rows (e.g. 3x3 field)
- [ ] comments
- [ ] ```` ```sequence````
- [ ] ```` ```flow````
- [ ] ```` ```gnuplot````
- [ ] ```` ```mermaid````
- [ ] ```` ```abc````
- [ ] citation style (.cs)
- [ ] label-list: ``* `label`: Description`` (escape hatch with double-space after list item dot)
- [ ] description-list: ``* **description**: Description`` (escape hatch with double-space after list item dot)
- [ ] includes of files other than images / md
- [ ] alert area??? (success, info, warning, danger)
- [ ] superscript (`foo^bar^`)
- [ ] subscript (`foo~bar~`)

# Config Options

- [x] output (file / stdout)
- [x] out-type (tex, pdf, …)
- [x] papersize
- [x] documentclass
- [x] geometry
- [x] header includes
- [x] pdf metadata
    - [ ] compare with pandoc
- [x] figures (true / false): puts every listing / image / … inside figures
- [x] oneside (true / false)
- [ ] itemizespacing
- [ ] use minted instead of lstlistings
- [ ] lstset
- [ ] graphicspath (probably not needed due to resolve)
- [ ] cleveref options
- [ ] let footnotes appear where they are first used vs where they are declared
- [ ] make softbreaks (line breaks) hard brakes (line ends with 2 spaces)
- [ ] typed config options per type (instead of strings) where appropriate

# Cli

- [x] `heradoc -o bar.pdf bar.md`
- [x] configuration file
- [x] configuration directly in .md file similar to pandoc, but better :)
    - pandoc header renders bad in other markdown renderers
    - ```` ```heradoc````
    - ```` ```config````
- [x] `heradoc bar.md` (short for `heradoc -o bar.pdf bar.md`)
- [x] every cli option must be configurable in the header (except `-o` and similar)
- [x] cli overrides header overrides config-file overrides defaults

# Backend

- latex backend
    - [x] article (scrartcl)
    - [x] thesis (scrbook)
    - [x] report (scrreprt)
    - [ ] beamer
- HTML backend
    + get rid of latex altogether
    + [ ] book
    + [ ] slides
- [ ] Generation via file templates
    + separate templates for headers and body
    + one template which headers and body get rendered into
    + http://www.arewewebyet.org/topics/templating/

# Frontend:

- [x] pulldown-cmark

Commit message:

Add examples for inlinelatex in readme

README.md, after:

Heradoc is a markdown to LaTeX converter.
It is a very biased partial reimplementation of [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html) with a pinch of
[hackmd](https://hackmd.io/features?both).

# Building

Rust needs to be installed.
To find out how to install rust, visit <https://rustup.rs> and follow
*all* of the instructions.

## Linux / WSL

**The below doesn't work for WSL, but it's a beginning. If anyone wants to try out building heradoc for WSL, feel free to open a PR.**

For ubuntu, ensure that you are using its latest version, to ensure that you have the newest versions of all packages.
To do that, run `sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade && do-release-upgrade`.

Install `pkg-config`, `libssl-dev`, `libpango1.0-dev`, `libxml2-dev`, `libcairo2-dev`, `texlive` and `graphviz`.
The above names are for ubuntu systems.
For other distributions, those packages may have different names.

## Windows

Install the following programs:
* texlive: Download the `install-tl-windows.exe` from <https://www.tug.org/texlive/acquire-netinstall.html>
    * if downloading with that installer is incredibly slow / takes incredibly long, abort installation and try using a different mirror
    * other latex implementations might also work
* graphviz:
    * **during installation, select *Add Graphviz to the system PATH for all users***
    * download and execute the installer from <https://www2.graphviz.org/Packages/stable/windows/10/cmake/Release/x64/>
    * make sure Graphviz is installed by running `dot.exe` from a *fresh* cmd
    * if the error message `There is no layout engine support for "dot"` appears:
        * open cmd as administrator (search for `cmd` in the start menu, right-click and select "Run as Administrator")
        * run `dot -c`
* in cmd, navigate to the folder into which you cloned this `heradoc` repository and run `cargo install --path .` (note the dot) build and install heradoc for the current user
* to convert a file from markdown to pdf, run `heradoc file.md` in cmd

# Features

- [x] includes of other md files (`[include foo.md]`, `![][foo.md]`)
- [x] cite author formatting (`> -- [@foo]`)
- [x] renders ok-ish in commonmark renderers
- [x] produces readable latex
    + worst case: fall back to latex if heradoc fails
- [x] generate links for sections (non-alphanumerics replaced with `-`, all lowercase)
- [x] Footnotes (currently the footnote is on the page where the footnote definition is placed, not its first reference)
- [x] biber support: `[@foo]` references biber
- [x] inline latex: `\ \LaTeX` in text, ```` ```inlinelatex\n\LaTeX\n``` ```` as block
    + still render markdown between `\begin` and `\end` etc, which pandoc doesn't
    + not if HTML as backend
- [x] Table of Contents: `[TOC]`, `![][//TOC]`
- [x] Bibliography: `[bibliography]`, `![][//bibliography]`
- [x] List of Listings: `[listoflistings]`, `![][//listoflistings]`
- [x] List of Tables: `[listoftables]`, `![][//listoftables]`
- [x] List of Figures: `[listoffigures]`, `![][//listoffigures]`
- [x] ```` ```graphviz````: Rendered graphviz dot format (using dot cli)
- [x] inline latex math mode (`` `$ foo``)
- [x] equation without number (```` ```$$\nfoo\n``` ````)
- [x] equation with number (```` ```$$$\nfoo\n``` ````)
- [x] hrule
- [x] pagebreak / newpage (`\n===\n`)
- [x] unicode support (for common symbols, translate into latex math equivalents, e.g. →, basically neo layer 6 :D )
    - [ ] typographic replacements (e.g. `(c)`, `(r)`, `(tm)`)
    - [ ] code-blocks with inline unicode / math-mode (`\begin{lstlisting}[mathescape=true]`)
- [x] `[appendix]`: sets all correct formatting for appendix, should be used before the heading
- [x] unified labels ([#16](https://github.com/oberien/heradoc/issues/16))
    - Header labels:
        - `{#my-label}\n\n# Header`: "prefix"-style
        - `# Header {#my-label}`: "inline"-style
        - `# Header`: autogenerated (`#header`)
            - `[^a-zA-Z0-9-_ ]` removed, `[ ]` replaced with `-`
    - Code (graphviz, equation, …) / Table / Image labels ("prefix-style"):
        - must start with `{` and end with `}`
        - must be either its own markdown paragraph (empty line before and in some cases empty line after)
            or at the start of a paragraph followed by a SoftBreak (empty line before and line break after)
        - may be indented (will be trimmed)
        ````md
        {#my-label}
        ```rust
        fn main() {}
        ```
        ````
        - Tables require empty line, otherwise it isn't a valid table
        ```md
        {#my-label}
        
        Head 1 | Head 2
        --- | :-:
        Cell 1 | Cell 2
        ```
    - Code (graphviz, equation, …) has additional style for easier compatibility with other markdown parsers
        ````
        ```rust,#my-label
        fn main() {}
        ```
        ````
    - Images (label must start a paragraph and be followed by a line break with the image directly after)
        ```md
        {#fancy-image}
        ![alt-text](link "title")
        ```
- [x] unified item attributes for code blocks / equations / numbered equations / tables
    - [x] label
    - [x] figure / nofigure / figure=true / figure=false
    - [x] caption
    - [x] scale / width / height for image / graphviz / ...
- [x] tasklist: `- [ ] foo`
- [ ] tables: merge columns
- [ ] tables: merge rows
- [ ] tables: merge columns and rows (e.g. 3x3 field)
- [ ] comments
- [ ] ```` ```sequence````
- [ ] ```` ```flow````
- [ ] ```` ```gnuplot````
- [ ] ```` ```mermaid````
- [ ] ```` ```abc````
- [ ] citation style (.cs)
- [ ] label-list: ``* `label`: Description`` (escape hatch with double-space after list item dot)
- [ ] description-list: ``* **description**: Description`` (escape hatch with double-space after list item dot)
- [ ] includes of files other than images / md
- [ ] alert area??? (success, info, warning, danger)
- [ ] superscript (`foo^bar^`)
- [ ] subscript (`foo~bar~`)

# Config Options

- [x] output (file / stdout)
- [x] out-type (tex, pdf, …)
- [x] papersize
- [x] documentclass
- [x] geometry
- [x] header includes
- [x] pdf metadata
    - [ ] compare with pandoc
- [x] figures (true / false): puts every listing / image / … inside figures
- [x] oneside (true / false)
- [ ] itemizespacing
- [ ] use minted instead of lstlistings
- [ ] lstset
- [ ] graphicspath (probably not needed due to resolve)
- [ ] cleveref options
- [ ] let footnotes appear where they are first used vs where they are declared
- [ ] make softbreaks (line breaks) hard brakes (line ends with 2 spaces)
- [ ] typed config options per type (instead of strings) where appropriate

# Cli

- [x] `heradoc -o bar.pdf bar.md`
- [x] configuration file
- [x] configuration directly in .md file similar to pandoc, but better :)
    - pandoc header renders bad in other markdown renderers
    - ```` ```heradoc````
    - ```` ```config````
- [x] `heradoc bar.md` (short for `heradoc -o bar.pdf bar.md`)
- [x] every cli option must be configurable in the header (except `-o` and similar)
- [x] cli overrides header overrides config-file overrides defaults

# Backend

- latex backend
    - [x] article (scrartcl)
    - [x] thesis (scrbook)
    - [x] report (scrreprt)
    - [ ] beamer
- HTML backend
    + get rid of latex altogether
    + [ ] book
    + [ ] slides
- [ ] Generation via file templates
    + separate templates for headers and body
    + one template which headers and body get rendered into
    + http://www.arewewebyet.org/topics/templating/

# Frontend:

- [x] pulldown-cmark
